You ask a lot of questions about health insurance portability, like
how can you process portability?
What are the benefits and risks at the time of portability?
So, today we will talk about
eight things about portability
that you need to know. Before starting the video,
I would like to introduce myself.
For those who are new, my
name is Gurleen Kaur and I am a
certified financial planner. I
make videos for you every week so that your
personal, financial life, and insurance
journey can become your happy one.
Our company's tagline is also '
Creating a Wealth of Happiness'. A quick
reminder for those who have
n't subscribed to our channel yet. Do
subscribe and you get the right
information at the right time. As I am about to share,
today we will talk about 8
things you should know about health insurance
portability. First of all, portability can happen only at the
time of renewal. This means that
when your policy's renewal date is due, only then
can you vote. You will
not be able to unport in between,
as there are different guidelines.  It is said that
you can apply for portability 45 to 60 days in advance,
but different companies have
different rules. You can do it with in one week also.
If your due date is in one
week, then in future you will be able to port on the last date also
with the same special approval.
So you can check the portability rules of the company in which you are
going to port
and you
can port it. This means that you will not be able to port in the mid-term.
For example, CR
sitting in September late, if your
policy is given in March, then you will be
able to do it only around March, you will not be
able to do it now. You will also be able to exercise portability only
when your renewal due date is no. There is
continuity of waiting
periods. This is given in portability. This
means that if you already have a policy somewhere
and now you are taking it to another company, if you are
shifting the policy, then the
waiting period that you are
serving in the old policy and
that waiting period will be carried forward to the new company along with the waitlisted sum.
Suppose you had a policy
of ₹5 lakh running in X company, you can
port it to the buy company for ₹10 lakh, then all the
waiting periods of ₹5 lakh, the
specific exclusions which are slow growing
illnesses, the pre-existing waiting
period, will be carried forward for ₹5 lakh to the
new company. The
time limit on this, which is the
difference of ₹5 lakh between ₹5 and ₹10 lakh, will have
waiting periods applicable
for your pre-existing diseases as well as
for specific exclusions. So, the
waiting period will be removed in the time you are bringing by voting. This is the
benefit of portability. Number three,
fresh medical underwriting will happen at the
time of portability. What does it mean
when you are moving from X company to buy company,
A company will do your fresh medical
underwriting, your continuity period will be carried forward
but will again
ask you about your medical condition,
about your lifestyle habits.  On that
basis they will give you the policy, so many times
you have this question that my
policy is running with X company for the last 10
years, so all my decisions are mentioned there
and I am porting, then
why is it necessary to tell the new company, it is absolutely necessary because
you are entering a new policy for the company,
so it is
very important for them to know your medical information
because their underwriting guidelines
may be different from the old company, that is, suppose
you had taken a policy from X,
then you did not have any medical condition, but in between
these 10 years some medical condition developed
and when you are porting to another company, then it is
very important to tell the company about your medical history of 10 years, whatever medical condition was diagnosed,
otherwise there will be a problem in one of your policies, the fourth
point is also related to this, one needs to provide all the
medical information to the new company, so
it means that whichever new company you are
joining, then it is
very important to tell them your medical history.  If yes, then you will
fill the proposal form again,
fill the medical information again and your policy
will be issued on that basis because the medical
underwriting guidelines of the
new company may be different. So do not do this, you understand
that you are shifting from one company
to another, then why is it
necessary to tell it, it is not a fresh policy. But
when you are going to the new company, they are
forwarding a fresh policy to you, you will do the cover
writing as per your requirement, so
disclosing medical information to them is very
important. Number five, what is the process of portability?
For portability, if you are going from one company to another, then you have to
inform the company that I want to
port my
policy from the former company to you and the former
company does not need to give you any information.
You have to inform the new company and
you have to share all the existing policy copies with them
that these are my existing
policies and I want to carry forward its benefits
and want to take a policy here.  The
process in that company is simple, just like you file a new application, in the
same way the
portability formula is applied, on that basis
your portability exercise is done.
Number six, your policy will be
active from the due date. Suppose your policy is due
in the month of March, you ported it
in February itself, but the active date of the policy will be the
due date which will be the same as the
end date of the old policy. The
new policy
which is the ported policy will start again from the same place where the old policy is ending, so the
active date will start from the due date and
not from the middle because right now
you have a contract with the ex-company till March,
that contract will end,
after that it will be carried forward with the buy company,
even if your policy is
issued earlier, but your due date
of the policy will remain in sync with the old policy.
Number seven, if suppose the buy
company does not give you the policy due to some
condition, you have applied for portability and the buy
company refuses because their
underwriting guidelines are different,
they do not want to take that risk because
what happens in portability is that the insurer has
clear instructions to give you the policy from them.  You
cannot impose any waiting period on your policy because you are carrying forward the old waiting
periods and are
giving you continuity benefits, so it is
possible that the new company may not
want to take that risk or in between some medical
condition may be diagnosed due to which you
cannot vote or the company does
not want to accept your policy, in that case you can
continue with your existing policy for
30 days, you can continue with the existing policy there,
number 8
last point as I said you get
credit for the waiting period, when you switch to the
ex-company or the same company, then you are getting
credit for the waiting period,
but as far as premium is concerned, many times you people
also ask that the
premium is less in that company, why is it more in this or why is it
more in that, why is it less in this, so the
benefits will be as per the new company, if you are
going from one company to another then you will get
its benefits, for
example, there is mobile portability, you are doing it with one
service provider  Yes,
you are using the same number
on another mobile service provider, so the
services you are getting there are from the new service
provider. Similarly,
when you are porting to health and security,
you are getting the services of the new service provider,
so the policy will be issued on their terms and conditions,
you will get claims as per their terms and conditions,
you will have to pay the premium as per their terms and conditions,
so basically you are shifting
from one company to another, so all your
benefits are also getting shifted,
your benefits may not be there in the new company, some may be
more or some may be less, you should check that before
porting, so this is all about
portability and I would
like to exercise again in portability, keep in mind that
it is not a fresh policy
in the company, but do not
forget to disclose your medical history, that is most
important because what
happens at times, you think that we will port, we are
carrying an old policy, and will
go to the new company, then why is it necessary to tell, it is
absolutely necessary to tell, most of the claims get
rejected because after porting  If you have an account
and you don't get the claim there, it causes
disappointment. If you
keep these eight things in mind, your claim will
not be rejected and portability will happen.
You can ask any question regarding portability. Our phone
number, WhatsApp number, email ID is mentioned below.
You can contact us in the comment section. If you
want to give any questions or feedback, please do give it.
Quick reminder before leaving: If you have
not yet subscribed to our channel, do
subscribe so that you get the right
information at the right time. We will meet
soon in the next week's new video. Space Safe,
Take Care, By So If You Are
Outside Any
New Company, So Then You Can Subscribe To It